README.md, before:

# DocumentScannerAI

A modular, AI-powered PDF document scanner and analyzer with a graphical user interface built on PyQt6.

## Features

- GUI interface — select and analyze PDFs without touching the terminal
- Two-layer PDF validation — extension check + magic number (`%PDF-`) verification
- Malicious content detection — scans for embedded JavaScript, auto-run actions, launch commands, and embedded files before analysis begins
- Text extraction via `pdfplumber`
- Keyword frequency analysis with stopword filtering
- AI-powered named entity recognition using spaCy (people, organizations, locations, dates, and more)
- Automatic text report generation saved alongside the analyzed file
- Full logging to `scanner.log`
- Terminal mode still available via `main.py`

## Project Structure

```
DOCUMENTSCANNERAI/
├── analysis/
│   ├── ai_analysis.py          — spaCy NLP entity extraction and summarization
│   └── keyword_analysis.py     — keyword frequency analysis
├── file_handlers/
│   └── pdf_handler.py          — PDF text extraction using pdfplumber
├── reports/
│   └── report_generator.py     — generates and saves text analysis reports
├── security/
│   ├── utils/                  — internal security utilities
│   ├── error_handling.py       — logging and error/warning helpers
│   └── validation.py           — PDF validation and pdfid stub scanner
├── tests/
│   ├── test_all.py
│   ├── test_keyword_analysis.py
│   ├── test_pdf_handler.py
│   └── test_pdf_handler_manual.py
├── sample_resumes/             — sample PDFs for testing
├── config.py                   — shared config (allowed extensions, etc.)
├── gui_main.py                 — GUI entry point (PyQt6) ← run this
├── main.py                     — terminal entry point (CLI)
├── Main.ui                     — Qt Designer UI layout file
├── requirements.txt
├── scanner.log                 — auto-generated runtime log
└── README.md
```

## Setup

1. **Install Python 3.12**

2. **Clone the repo and navigate into it**

3. **Create a virtual environment** (recommended):
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv

   # Windows
   .venv\Scripts\activate

   # macOS/Linux
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

4. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   python -m spacy download en_core_web_sm
   ```

## Usage

### GUI (recommended)
```bash
python gui_main.py
```
Click **Select PDF Document** to open a file picker, then click **Analyze Document**. Results stream into the output panel and a report is saved automatically.

### Terminal
```bash
python main.py
```
You will be prompted to enter the path to a PDF file. Results are printed to the console and a report is saved.

## Running Tests
```bash
python -m pytest tests/
```

## Dependencies

| Package | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `PyQt6` | GUI framework |
| `pdfplumber` | PDF text extraction |
| `spacy` + `en_core_web_sm` | Named entity recognition |
| `colorama` | Colored terminal output (terminal mode) |

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Refactor: cleanup dead code, fix validation, update deps and tests pre-AI patch
- Remove pdfid_stub.py (always returned zeros, never scanned anything)
- Remove security/validation.py (fully duplicated by gui_main.py)
- Remove analysis/ai_analysis.py and keyword_analysis.py (orphaned, replaced by AI patch)
- Remove Main.ui (UI now built entirely in Python, no longer needed)
- Remove empty test files (test_pdf_handler.py, test_keyword_analysis.py, test_pdf_handler_manual.py)
- Fix requirements.txt: add PyQt6 + anthropic, remove spacy/en_core_web_sm
- Fix config.py: ALLOWED_EXTENSIONS changed from list to set, remove unused MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB
- Update pdf_handler.py: raises RuntimeError on failure instead of silent print + empty string
- Fix thread collision bug: quit() + wait() on old thread before spawning new one
- Fix double scan: security scan result stored on select, reused by worker
- Fix file existence check in worker before analysis begins
- Update test_all.py: remove orphaned keyword test, add RuntimeError assertions, add config validation test
- Update README: remove Main.ui reference, remove spaCy feature, add roadmap

README.md, after:

# DocumentScannerAI

A modular, AI-powered PDF document scanner and resume analyzer with a graphical user interface built on PyQt6.

## Features

- GUI interface — select and analyze PDFs without touching the terminal
- Two-layer PDF validation — extension check + magic number (`%PDF-`) verification
- Malicious content detection — scans for embedded JavaScript, auto-run actions, launch commands, and embedded files before analysis begins
- Clean text extraction via `pdfplumber` with resume-specific formatting (section headers detected, hyphenated line breaks rejoined, junk lines removed)
- AI-powered resume analysis — strengths, weaknesses, skills, and recommendations *(coming in next patch)*
- Full logging to `scanner.log`
- Terminal mode still available via `main.py`

## Project Structure

```
DocumentScannerAI/
├── analysis/               — AI analysis modules (next patch)
├── file_handlers/
│   └── pdf_handler.py      — PDF text extraction and cleaning
├── reports/
│   └── report_generator.py — text report generation
├── security/
│   └── error_handling.py   — logging and error helpers (terminal mode)
├── tests/
│   └── test_all.py         — unit tests
├── sample_resumes/         — sample PDFs for testing
├── config.py               — shared configuration
├── gui_main.py             — GUI entry point (PyQt6) ← run this
├── main.py                 — terminal entry point (CLI)
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## Setup

1. **Install Python 3.12**

2. **Clone the repo and navigate into it**

3. **Create a virtual environment** (recommended):
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv

   # Windows
   .venv\Scripts\activate

   # macOS / Linux
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

4. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Usage

### GUI (recommended)
```bash
python gui_main.py
```
Click **Select PDF** to open a file picker — the file is validated and scanned for malicious content immediately on selection. Click **Run Analysis** to extract and display the cleaned text.

### Terminal
```bash
python main.py
```
You will be prompted to enter the path to a PDF file.

## Running Tests
```bash
python -m pytest tests/
```

## Dependencies

| Package | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `PyQt6` | GUI framework |
| `pdfplumber` | PDF text extraction |
| `colorama` | Colored terminal output (terminal mode) |
| `anthropic` | AI resume analysis (next patch) |

## Roadmap

- [x] PDF validation and malicious content detection
- [x] Clean text extraction with resume formatting
- [x] Professional dark-theme GUI
- [ ] AI-powered resume strengths, weaknesses, and skills analysis
- [ ] Export analysis to PDF report

## License

MIT
